kafka migration tutorial (#1754)
aiven/devportal: docs/tutorials/kafka-migration.rst

* **Connectivity**: the source and target clusters need to be connected via MirrorMaker 2 for the data migration, therefore proper connection needs to be established. Moreover, you need to ensure all the clients reading or writing to Apache Kafka can connect to the brokers as well as any self hosted Kafka connect cluster. 

  .. Warning::

    As part of the connectivity check you also need to ensure:
        
    * That the **connection bandwidth** is enough to sync the data between environments.
    * That the needed networking setups are available in the target Apache Kafka cluster, some examples on how to define custom networking setups on Aiven:
        * :doc:`Firewalls/security groups </docs/platform/concepts/cloud-security>`.
        * :doc:`VPC peering </docs/platform/howto/manage-vpc-peering>`.
        * :doc:`Privatelink </docs/platform/howto/use-aws-privatelinks>`.

> Create an Apache Kafka integration endpoint

Author: Hi Celeste! 
Good question. I believe this tutorial is more "high level" and requires the user to have an external Kafka cluster that is accessible by Aiven. We, on purpose, tried to avoid any specific vendor and go with more of a high level approach.

I'll add a line to drive people to [here](https://github.com/apache/kafka/blob/trunk/connect/mirror/README.md) to say if you're using standalone MM2, you can define sources and sinks in the MM2 config file

> Create an Apache Kafka integration endpoint

Reviewer: I think that's a good idea (that won't take an absolute ton of time to implement)

To create the alias with the `Aiven Console <https://console.aiven.io/>`_ you can follow the steps below:

1. Navigate to the MirrorMaker 2 ``demo-mm2`` service page.
2. Click on the **Integration** tab.
3. Scroll until you reach the **External integrations** section.
4. Select **Cluster for replication** within the available external integrations.

   .. Warning::

    Selecting the **Cluster for replication** option from the *Aiven solutions* section will only allow you to integrate with Aiven for Apache Kafka services. 
    
    Therefore, if your source Kafka cluster is not an Aiven service, you need to select the **Cluster for replication** from the **External integrations** section.
    
5. Select the endpoint name defined in a previous step (``mySourceKafkaCluster``) and click **Continue**.

   .. image:: /images/tutorials/kafka-migration/external-endpoint-integration.png
    :alt: Aiven Console, MirrorMaker 2 alias definition for the external Apache Kafka endpoint integration

6. Give the source cluster an alias name, as example ``kafka-source``, and click **Enable**.

> Once the steps are done, you should be able to see the two aliases ``kafka-source`` and ``kafka-target`` defined as integrations in the ``demo-mm2`` service:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the steps are done, you should be able to see the two aliases, ``kafka-source`` and ``kafka-target``m defined as integrations in the ``demo-mm2`` service:
```

.. image:: /images/tutorials/kafka-migration/source-target-integration-enabled.png
    :alt: Aiven Console, MirrorMaker 2 source and target integration enabled

> 
> .. Warning::
> 
>   In case of any connection problem to the source or target Apache Kafka cluster, you'll be able to see the following error message in the MirrorMaker 2 service overview page.
> 
>   .. image:: /images/tutorials/kafka-migration/error-connection.png
>     :alt: Aiven Console, MirrorMaker 2 service overview, error message stating that the connection to a target Kafka service is not working
> 
>   You can also review the service logs by clicking on the **Log** tab.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

.. Warning::

  If you experience connection problems to the source or target clusters, the MirrorMaker 2 service overview page shows the following error:
  
  .. image:: /images/tutorials/kafka-migration/error-connection.png
    :alt: Aiven Console, MirrorMaker 2 service overview, error message stating that the connection to a target Kafka service is not working

  You can also review the service logs by clicking on the **Log** tab.
```

Start the MirrorMaker 2 replication flow
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

In the previous steps you defined MirrorMaker 2 source and target aliases. Now it's time to define the replication flow.

You first need to identify the set of topics you want to migrate to the new cluster, and create a :doc:`Java regular expression </docs/products/kafka/kafka-mirrormaker/concepts/replication-flow-topics-regex>` that includes them. As example, if you want to migrate all the topics starting with ``customer.`` your regular expression will be ``customer\..*``.

.. Tip::

  You can list both topics to be included and excluded in the allow list and stop list.

> You can create a MirrorMaker 2 replication flow in the `Aiven Console <https://console.aiven.io/>`__ with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, create a MirrorMaker 2 replication flow in the `Aiven Console <https://console.aiven.io/>`__:
```

   * **Emit heartbeats enabled**: allow MirrorMaker 2 to emit heartbeats to keep the connection open even in cases where no messages are replicated.
   * **Enable**: to enable the data sync job.

   The following represent an example of a replication flow setting:

   .. image:: /images/tutorials/kafka-migration/replication-flow-details.png
    :alt: Aiven Console, replication flow details

   .. Warning::

    Before starting the replication flow, you might want to manually create the topics in the target Kafka cluster. MirrorMaker 2 replication flow will **not** recreate topics with the same configuration options. This step is specifically important if the topic needs to be :doc:`compacted </docs/products/kafka/concepts/log-compaction>` or if some settings (like partitioning) are key for the correct working of the data pipeline.

#. Click on **Create**

> Once you followed all the above steps you should see the replication flow being enabled :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you followed all the above steps you should see the enabled replication flow:
```

.. image:: /images/tutorials/kafka-migration/replication-flow-enabled.png
    :alt: Aiven Console, MirrorMaker 2 replication flow enabled

> And, browsing the target ``demo-kafka`` service, you should see the topics being replicated. The following image shows the replication (using the ``DefaultReplicationPolicy``) of the ``kafka-source.customer.clicks`` and ``kafka-source.customer.purchases`` topics together with MirrorMakers 2 internal topics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Browsing the target ``demo-kafka`` service, you should see the topics being replicated. The following image shows replication (using the ``DefaultReplicationPolicy``) of the ``kafka-source.customer.clicks`` and ``kafka-source.customer.purchases`` topics together with MirrorMakers 2 internal topics.
```

.. image:: /images/tutorials/kafka-migration/replicated-topics.png
    :alt: Aiven Console, target Aiven for Apache Kafka with the replicated clicks and purchases topics

.. Note::

>   Once you started the replication flow, it will continuously check for topics matching the regular expression defined. Therefore, if you create new topics matching the regex in the source cluster, they'll appear also in the target cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Once you start the replication flow, MirrorMaker 2 continuously checks for topics matching the regular expression defined. Therefore, if you create new topics matching the regex in the source cluster, they'll appear also in the target cluster.
```

.. _tutorial_kafka_migration_replication_flow_lag:

Monitor the MirrorMaker 2 replication flow lag
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

> After starting the replication flow, MirrorMaker 2 will start moving data between the source and target Kafka clusters in asynchronous mode. To measure how the replication is performing you might want to check the replication lag: the delay in synchronization between the source and target Apache Kafka cluster. Once the lag metric is `0`, the two Apache Kafka clusters are in sync.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After starting the replication flow, MirrorMaker 2 starts moving data between the source and target Kafka clusters in asynchronous mode. To measure how the replication is performing you might want to check the replication lag: the delay in synchronization between the source and target Apache Kafka cluster. Once the lag is `0`, the two Apache Kafka clusters are in sync.
```

> You can review how to create services integrations here. 

Reviewer: ?

.. image:: /images/tutorials/kafka-migration/mirrormaker-replication-lag.png
    :alt: Grafana dashboard showing the ``kafka_mirrormaker_summary.replication_lag`` metric

Migrate topic schemas
---------------------

Apache Kafka topics schemas define the structure of the data in certain topics. They can be migrated in two different methods:

#. By replicating the schemas topic stored in Apache Kafka (usually located in the ``_schemas`` topic).
#. By extracting the schema information from the source and registering in the target environment using the appropriate APIs.

The second option offers much more control over what schemas are migrated. To register the schemas in an Aiven for Apache Kafka service you can:

* Navigate in the `Aiven Console <https://console.aiven.io/>`__, service page, **Schemas** tab.
* Use the `Karapace rest APIs <https://api.aiven.io/doc/#tag/Service:_Kafka/operation/ServiceSchemaRegistrySubjectVersionPost>`_.
* Use :doc:`Aiven command line interface </docs/tools/cli>`.

Migrate access control list
---------------------------

> Apache Kafka Access Control Lists (ACLs) define how various users can interact with the topics and schemas. To migrate ACLs we recommend to extract the ACL definition from the source Apache Kafka cluster and recreate them in the target cluster. 
> 
> If the target of the migration is Aiven for Apache Kafka you can define the ACLs with:
> 
> * The `Aiven Console <https://console.aiven.io/>`__, service page, **Access Control Lists (ACL)** tab.
> * The dedicated `Aiven REST API <https://api.aiven.io/doc/#tag/Service:_Kafka/operation/ServiceKafkaAclAdd>`__.
> * The dedicated :doc:`Aiven CLI command </docs/tools/cli/service/acl>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apache Kafka Access Control Lists (ACLs) define how various users are allowed to interact with the topics and schemas. To migrate ACLs we recommend extracting the ACL definition from the source Apache Kafka cluster and recreate the ACL in the target cluster. 

If the target of the migration is Aiven for Apache Kafka, you can define the ACLs with:

* The `Aiven Console <https://console.aiven.io/>`__, service page, **Access Control Lists (ACL)** tab.
* The dedicated `Aiven REST API <https://api.aiven.io/doc/#tag/Service:_Kafka/operation/ServiceKafkaAclAdd>`__.
* The dedicated :doc:`Aiven CLI command </docs/tools/cli/service/acl>`.
```

> Change clients settings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Change client settings
```

-----------------------

> After the replication flow is running, with the schemas and ACLs are in place, you can then start point producers and consumers to the target Apache Kafka cluster. 
> 
> .. Warning::
> 
>   To avoid any Apache Kafka messages to be lost during the asynchronous migration performed with MirrorMaker 2, it is suggested to stop the producers, check that both the consumer lag in the source system and the MirrorMaker 2 replication lag is ``0`` and then point producers and consumers to the target Apache Kafka cluster. 
>   
>   The :ref:`migration process <tutorial_kafka_migration_migration_process>` provides a detailed series of steps to follow.
> 
> If the target of the migration is Aiven for Apache Kafka, you can find how to download the required certificates and connect as producer or consumer in the :doc:`dedicated documentation </docs/products/kafka/howto/list-code-samples>`.
> 
> 
> 
> .. _tutorial_kafka_migration_migration_process:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the replication flow is running and the schemas and ACLs are in place, you can start pointing producers and consumers to the target Apache Kafka cluster. 

.. Warning::

  To avoid losing Apache Kafka messages during the asynchronous MirrorMaker 2 migration, we suggest to stopping the producers, checking that both the consumer lag in the source system and the MirrorMaker 2 replication lag is ``0`` and then pointing producers and consumers to the target Apache Kafka cluster. 
  
  The :ref:`migration process <tutorial_kafka_migration_migration_process>` provides a detailed series of steps to follow.

If the target of the migration is Aiven for Apache Kafka, follow the documentation to :doc:`download the required certificates and connect as a producer or consumer </docs/products/kafka/howto/list-code-samples>`.

.. _tutorial_kafka_migration_migration_process:
```

Complete migration process
--------------------------

The following diagram showcases all the steps included in an Apache Kafka migration process.

.. mermaid::

    graph TD;

        id1(Start Migration process)-->id2(Create target Apache Kafka service);
        id2-->id3(Create Apache Kafka topics in the target cluster);
        id3-->id4(Create Apache Kafka schemas in the target cluster);
        id4-->id5(Create Apache Kafka ACLs in the target cluster);
        id5-->id6(Create source Apache Kafka cluster endpoint);
        id6-->id7(Create Apache Kafka MirrorMaker 2 service);
        id7-->id8(Define MirrorMaker 2 aliases for source and target Apache Kafka clusters);
        id8-->id9(Stop Apache Kafka producers on the original Apache Kafka cluster);
        id9-->id10(Wait for consumer lag to go to 0 in the original Apache Kafka cluster);
        id10-->id11(Wait for MirrorMaker 2 replication lag to go to 0);
        id11-->id12(Stop consumers in the source Apache Kafka cluster);
        id12-->id13(Point consumers to the target Apache Kafka cluster and start them);
        id13-->id14(Point producers to the target Apache Kafka cluster and start them);

>         id14-->id15(End Migration process);

Reviewer: What are the reader's next steps? 

What should they check on after the migration is done, to ensure that things went as planned?

Author: Added a final brief section on the four main actions to check (ACLs, schemas, topics&data, producers and consumers)

Migrate an Apache Kafka® instance using MirrorMaker 2
===========================================

What you will learn
---------------------------

Follow this tutorial and you'll learn all the steps involved in an Apache Kafka® migration:

* What are the prerequisites? What should you pay attention to, before migrating?
* How to sync data with MirrorMaker 2.
* How to migrate Apache Kafka topic schemas.
* How to migrate Apache Kafka ACLs (Access Control Lists).
* How to migrate Apache Kafka consumer group offsets.
* How to migrate Apache Kafka clients and connectors.

What are you going to build
---------------------------

This tutorial outlines you all common the steps to migrate an existing Apache Kafka® cluster to a new service provider using MirrorMaker 2. 

> All migrations are different, but the usual use case is to migrate between an on-premises systems to a managed or self-hosted Apache Kafka cluster or vice versa. This tutorial outlines a set of checks, actions and processes to follow to perform a complete migration. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All migrations are different, but the usual use case is migrating between an on-premises systems to a managed or self-hosted Apache Kafka cluster or vice versa. This tutorial outlines a set of checks, actions and processes to follow to perform a complete migration. 
```

In this tutorial, we'll be migrating to :doc:`Aiven for Apache Kafka® </docs/products/kafka>`, but the steps described should work with any other Apache Kafka service. 

> The data migration will be performed using :doc:`MirrorMaker 2 </docs/products/kafka/kafka-mirrormaker>`, a fully managed distributed Apache Kafka® data replication utility.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll use :doc:`MirrorMaker 2 </docs/products/kafka/kafka-mirrormaker>`, to migrate the data. MirrorMaker 2 a fully managed distributed Apache Kafka® data replication utility.
```

.. mermaid::

    graph LR;

        id1(Source Apache Kafka cluster)-- source alias -->id2(MirrorMaker 2);
        id2-- sink alias -->id4(Target Apache Kafka cluster);

.. Warning:: 

  MirrorMaker 2 provides **asynchronous** replication across clusters. To avoid data loss during the migration, you need to ensure that the replication lag is **0** before pointing the new producers and consumers to the target Kafka environment. More information in the :ref:`monitor the MirrorMaker 2 replication flow lag <tutorial_kafka_migration_replication_flow_lag>` section.

Prerequisites
-------------

> The exact migration steps can vary, depending on the particular use of the existing source Kafka system. That said, as a general pre-requisite, the source and target system need to have the compatible version numbers, feature sets, and connectivity requirements. This tutorial however assumes the following pre-requisites:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The exact migration steps vary depending on the existing source Kafka system. That said, as a general pre-requisite, the source and target system need to have the compatible version numbers, feature sets, and connectivity requirements. To break this down further, the tutorial assumes:
```

* Go to the `Aiven Console <https://console.aiven.io/>`_.
* Click on **Integration Endpoints**.
  
  .. image:: /images/tutorials/kafka-migration/integration-endpoints.png
    :alt: The Aiven Console with the integration endpoints option highlighted

* Select **External Apache Kafka** and click on **Create New**.

  .. image:: /images/tutorials/kafka-migration/external-kafka.png
    :alt: The Aiven Console with the option to create an External Apache Kafka integration highlighted

* Give the endpoint a **name** (like ``mySourceKafkaCluster``), this will later be used as reference by MirrorMaker 2. Moreover list the **bootstrap servers** and the **Security protocol** that need to be used to connect.

  .. image:: /images/tutorials/kafka-migration/external-kafka-details.png
    :alt: The list of parameters (endpoint name, bootstrap servers, security protocol) needed to define an External Apache Kafka integration

.. Warning::

    The external integration setup does **not** test the connectivity between Aiven and the source Apache Kafka cluster.

    Always check if additional firewall rules need to be set up to allow MirrorMaker 2 to access your source Apache Kafka cluster.

>     Aiven allows you to associate :doc:`static IP addresses </docs/platform/concepts/static-ips>` to all the services, please `contact us <mailto:support@aiven.io>`_ if you need additional help.

Reviewer: I'm not sure we should include this link to support here.

Author: Removed and rephrased, thanks!

      :alt: Aiven Console, *Service integration* section and **Manage integrations** button

4. Select **Apache Kafka MirrorMaker** 2.

   .. image:: /images/tutorials/kafka-migration/list-integrations.png
      :alt: Aiven Console, list of available integrations

5. In the new window popup, select the **New Service** option and click on **Continue**.

6. Give the new service a name, ``demo-mm2``, then select the cloud provider, region, and service plan. Then click on **Continue**.

7. Define the **Cluster alias**, this is the logical name you'll use to define the target ``demo-kafka`` cluster.  Use``kafka-target``.

Once you follow all the steps, you should see an active integration between ``demo-kafka`` and ``demo-mm2`` named ``kafka-target``:

.. image:: /images/tutorials/kafka-migration/mm2-active-integration.png
    :alt: Aiven Console, active MirrorMaker 2 integration

Create a data replication using MirrorMaker 2
---------------------------------------------

The next step in the migration journey is to create a data replication from the source cluster to the Aiven for Apache Kafka service named ``demo-kafka``. To create a replication you need to:

> * Create an alias for the source Apache Kafka cluster (the target alias ``kafka-target`` was defined during the creation of the MirrorMaker 2 service).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Create an alias for the source Apache Kafka cluster (the target alias ``kafka-target``).
```

> * Define the replication follow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Define the replication flow.
```

    :alt: Aiven Console, MirrorMaker 2 alias definition for the external Apache Kafka endpoint integration

6. Give the source cluster an alias name, for example ``kafka-source``, and click **Enable**.

Once the steps are done, you should be able to see the two aliases, ``kafka-source`` and ``kafka-target`` defined as integrations in the ``demo-mm2`` service:

.. image:: /images/tutorials/kafka-migration/source-target-integration-enabled.png
    :alt: Aiven Console, MirrorMaker 2 source and target integration enabled

.. Warning::

  If you experience connection problems to the source or target clusters, the MirrorMaker 2 service overview page shows the following error:
  
  .. image:: /images/tutorials/kafka-migration/error-connection.png
    :alt: Aiven Console, MirrorMaker 2 service overview, error message stating that the connection to a target Kafka service is not working

  You can also review the service logs by clicking on the **Log** tab.

Start the MirrorMaker 2 replication flow
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

In the previous steps you defined MirrorMaker 2 source and target aliases. Now it's time to define the replication flow.

> You first need to identify the set of topics you want to migrate to the new cluster, and create a :doc:`Java regular expression </docs/products/kafka/kafka-mirrormaker/concepts/replication-flow-topics-regex>` that includes them. As example, if you want to migrate all the topics starting with ``customer.`` your regular expression will be ``customer\..*``.

Reviewer: Can we give an example, here, that includes more than one topic? (Regex is hard, examples are helpful, I think we can assume people will migrate more than one topic.)

Migrate an Apache Kafka® instance using MirrorMaker 2
=====================================================

What you will learn
---------------------------

Follow this tutorial and you'll learn all the steps involved in an Apache Kafka® migration:

> * What are the prerequisites? What should you pay attention to, before migrating?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Prerequisites: what should you pay attention to before migrating?
```

> * How to sync data with MirrorMaker 2.
> * How to migrate Apache Kafka topic schemas.
> * How to migrate Apache Kafka ACLs (Access Control Lists).
> * How to migrate Apache Kafka consumer group offsets.
> * How to migrate Apache Kafka clients and connectors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Syncing data with MirrorMaker 2
* Migrating Apache Kafka topic schemas
* Migrating Apache Kafka ACLs (Access Control Lists)
* Migrating Apache Kafka consumer group offsets
* Migrating Apache Kafka clients and connectors
```

What are you going to build
---------------------------

This tutorial outlines all common the steps to migrate an existing Apache Kafka® cluster to a new service provider using MirrorMaker 2. 

> All migrations are different, but the usual use case is migrating between on-premises systems to a managed or self-hosted Apache Kafka cluster or vice versa. This tutorial outlines a set of checks, actions and processes to follow to perform a complete migration. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All migrations are different, but the usual scenario is migrating between on-premises systems to a managed or self-hosted Apache Kafka cluster or vice versa. This tutorial outlines a set of checks, actions and processes to follow to perform a complete migration. 
```

In this tutorial, we'll be migrating to :doc:`Aiven for Apache Kafka® </docs/products/kafka>`, but the steps described should work with any other Apache Kafka service. 

> We'll use :doc:`MirrorMaker 2 </docs/products/kafka/kafka-mirrormaker>` to migrate the data. MirrorMaker 2 a fully managed distributed Apache Kafka® data replication utility.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll use :doc:`MirrorMaker 2 </docs/products/kafka/kafka-mirrormaker>` to migrate the data. MirrorMaker 2 is a fully managed distributed Apache Kafka® data replication utility.
```

Once the steps are done, you should be able to see the two aliases, ``kafka-source`` and ``kafka-target`` defined as integrations in the ``demo-mm2`` service:

.. image:: /images/tutorials/kafka-migration/source-target-integration-enabled.png
    :alt: Aiven Console, MirrorMaker 2 source and target integration enabled

.. Warning::

  If you experience connection problems to the source or target clusters, the MirrorMaker 2 service overview page shows the following error:
  
  .. image:: /images/tutorials/kafka-migration/error-connection.png
    :alt: Aiven Console, MirrorMaker 2 service overview, error message stating that the connection to a target Kafka service is not working

  You can also review the service logs by clicking on the **Log** tab.

Start the MirrorMaker 2 replication flow
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

In the previous steps you defined MirrorMaker 2 source and target aliases. Now it's time to define the replication flow.

You first need to identify the set of topics you want to migrate to the new cluster, and create a :doc:`Java regular expression </docs/products/kafka/kafka-mirrormaker/concepts/replication-flow-topics-regex>` that includes them. 

> As example, if you want to migrate all the topics starting with ``customer.`` and the ones containing ``.logistic.`` you can add the two regular expressions ``customer\..*`` and ``.*\.logistic\..*``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if you want to migrate all the topics starting with ``customer.`` and the ones containing ``.logistic.`` you can add the two regular expressions: ``customer\..*`` and ``.*\.logistic\..*``.
```

   * **Topics blacklist**: the :doc:`Java regular expression </docs/products/kafka/kafka-mirrormaker/concepts/replication-flow-topics-regex>` defining which topics to exclude. E.g. ``*\..test`` to exclude all topics ending with ``test.``.
   * **Sync group offset**: to define whether to sync the topic containing the consumer group offset.
   * **Sync interval in seconds**: to define the frequency of the sync.
   * **Offset syncs topic location**: to provide offset translation, MirrorMaker 2 uses the ``mm2-offset-syncs`` topic, that can be located either in the source or sink cluster.
   * **Replication policy class**: controls the prefix when replicating topics. ``DefaultReplicationPolicy`` sets the topic name in the target Kafka service as ``source_cluster_alias.topic_name`` (prefixing the topic name with the source cluster alias), while ``IdentityReplicationPolicy`` sets the target topic name equal to the source topic name.
   * **Emit heartbeats enabled**: allow MirrorMaker 2 to emit heartbeats to keep the connection open even in cases where no messages are replicated.
   * **Enable**: to enable the data sync job.

>    The following represent an example of a replication flow setting:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The following represents an example of a replication flow setting:
```

   .. image:: /images/tutorials/kafka-migration/replication-flow-details.png
    :alt: Aiven Console, replication flow details

   .. Warning::

    Before starting the replication flow, you might want to manually create the topics in the target Kafka cluster. MirrorMaker 2 replication flow will **not** recreate topics with the same configuration options. This step is specifically important if the topic needs to be :doc:`compacted </docs/products/kafka/concepts/log-compaction>` or if some settings (like partitioning) are key for the correct working of the data pipeline.

#. Click on **Create**

> Once you followed all the above steps you should see the enabled replication flow:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After following the steps above, you should see the enabled replication flow:
```

.. image:: /images/tutorials/kafka-migration/replication-flow-enabled.png
    :alt: Aiven Console, MirrorMaker 2 replication flow enabled

Browsing the target ``demo-kafka`` service, you should see the topics being replicated. The following image shows replication (using the ``DefaultReplicationPolicy``) of the ``kafka-source.customer.clicks`` and ``kafka-source.customer.purchases`` topics together with MirrorMakers 2 internal topics.

.. image:: /images/tutorials/kafka-migration/replicated-topics.png
    :alt: Aiven Console, target Aiven for Apache Kafka with the replicated clicks and purchases topics

.. Note::

>   Once you start the replication flow, MirrorMaker 2 continuously checks for topics matching the regular expression defined. Therefore, if you create new topics matching the regex in the source cluster, they'll appear also in the target cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Once you start the replication flow, MirrorMaker 2 continuously checks for topics matching the regular expression defined. If you create new topics matching the regex in the source cluster, they'll appear also in the target cluster.
```

.. _tutorial_kafka_migration_replication_flow_lag:

Monitor the MirrorMaker 2 replication flow lag
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

After starting the replication flow, MirrorMaker 2 starts moving data between the source and target Kafka clusters in asynchronous mode. To measure how the replication is performing you might want to check the replication lag: the delay in synchronization between the source and target Apache Kafka cluster. Once the lag is `0`, the two Apache Kafka clusters are in sync.

Follow the documentation to review :doc:`how to create services integrations </docs/platform/howto/create-service-integration>`. 

The metric you want to track is called ``kafka_mirrormaker_summary.replication_lag``. The image below showcases a Grafana® dashboard showing the mean MirrorMaker 2 replication lag trending to ``0``.

.. image:: /images/tutorials/kafka-migration/mirrormaker-replication-lag.png
    :alt: Grafana dashboard showing the ``kafka_mirrormaker_summary.replication_lag`` metric

Migrate topic schemas
---------------------

> Apache Kafka topics schemas define the structure of the data in certain topics. They can be migrated two different ways:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apache Kafka topic schemas define the structure of the data in certain topics. They can be migrated two different ways:
```

> Apache Kafka topics schemas define the structure of the data in certain topics. They can be migrated in two different methods:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apache Kafka topics schemas define the structure of the data in certain topics. They can be migrated two different ways:
```

#. By replicating the schemas topic stored in Apache Kafka (usually located in the ``_schemas`` topic).
#. By extracting the schema information from the source and registering in the target environment using the appropriate APIs.

> The second option offers much more control over what schemas are migrated. To register the schemas in an Aiven for Apache Kafka service you can:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second option offers much more control over which schemas are migrated. To register the schemas in an Aiven for Apache Kafka service you can:
```

* Navigate in the `Aiven Console <https://console.aiven.io/>`__, service page, **Schemas** tab.
* Use the `Karapace rest APIs <https://api.aiven.io/doc/#tag/Service:_Kafka/operation/ServiceSchemaRegistrySubjectVersionPost>`_.
* Use :doc:`Aiven command line interface </docs/tools/cli>`.

Migrate access control list
---------------------------

> Apache Kafka Access Control Lists (ACLs) define how various users are allowed to interact with the topics and schemas. To migrate ACLs we recommend extracting the ACL definition from the source Apache Kafka cluster and recreate the ACL in the target cluster. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apache Kafka Access Control Lists (ACLs) define how various users are allowed to interact with the topics and schemas. To migrate ACLs, we recommend extracting the ACL definition from the source Apache Kafka cluster, then recreating the ACL in the target cluster. 
```

If the target of the migration is Aiven for Apache Kafka, you can define the ACLs with:

* The `Aiven Console <https://console.aiven.io/>`__, service page, **Access Control Lists (ACL)** tab.
* The dedicated `Aiven REST API <https://api.aiven.io/doc/#tag/Service:_Kafka/operation/ServiceKafkaAclAdd>`__.
* The dedicated :doc:`Aiven CLI command </docs/tools/cli/service/acl>`.

Change client settings
-----------------------

After the replication flow is running and the schemas and ACLs are in place, you can start pointing producers and consumers to the target Apache Kafka cluster. 

.. Warning::

>   To avoid losing Apache Kafka messages during the asynchronous MirrorMaker 2 migration, we suggest to stopping the producers, checking that both the consumer lag in the source system and the MirrorMaker 2 replication lag is ``0`` and then pointing producers and consumers to the target Apache Kafka cluster. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  To avoid losing Apache Kafka messages during the asynchronous MirrorMaker 2 migration, we suggest stopping the producers, checking that both the consumer lag in the source system and the MirrorMaker 2 replication lag is ``0``, and then pointing producers and consumers to the target Apache Kafka cluster. 
```

.. mermaid::

    graph TD;

        id1(Start Migration process)-->id2(Create target Apache Kafka service);
        id2-->id3(Create Apache Kafka topics in the target cluster);
        id3-->id4(Create Apache Kafka schemas in the target cluster);
        id4-->id5(Create Apache Kafka ACLs in the target cluster);
        id5-->id6(Create source Apache Kafka cluster endpoint);
        id6-->id7(Create Apache Kafka MirrorMaker 2 service);
        id7-->id8(Define MirrorMaker 2 aliases for source and target Apache Kafka clusters);
        id8-->id9(Stop Apache Kafka producers on the original Apache Kafka cluster);
        id9-->id10(Wait for consumer lag to go to 0 in the original Apache Kafka cluster);
        id10-->id11(Wait for MirrorMaker 2 replication lag to go to 0);
        id11-->id12(Stop consumers in the source Apache Kafka cluster);
        id12-->id13(Point consumers to the target Apache Kafka cluster and start them);
        id13-->id14(Point producers to the target Apache Kafka cluster and start them);
        id14-->id15(End Migration process);

Check the migration results
---------------------------

> Once the migration process is terminated you should check, in the target Apache Kafka cluster, that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the migration process terminates, check the target Apache cluster to ensure that:
```

> * All the ACLs are in place, in the `Aiven Console <https://console.aiven.io/>`_ service page -> **Access Control List (ACL)** Tab. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* All the ACLs are in place: in the `Aiven Console <https://console.aiven.io/>`_ service page -> **Access Control List (ACL)** Tab. 
```

> * All the schemas are present in the target schema registry (Karapace for Aiven for Apache Kafka), in the `Aiven Console <https://console.aiven.io/>`_ service page -> **Schemas** Tab.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* All the schemas are present in the target schema registry (Karapace for Aiven for Apache Kafka): in the `Aiven Console <https://console.aiven.io/>`_ service page -> **Schemas** Tab.  
```

> * All the topics included in the replication flows defined are present, and the data is flowing, in the `Aiven Console <https://console.aiven.io/>`_ service page -> **Topics** Tab. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* All the topics included in the replication flows defined are present, and the data is flowing: In the `Aiven Console <https://console.aiven.io/>`_ service page -> **Topics** Tab. 
```
